\section{Previous work}

\subsection{Overview of existing techniques}

In his excellent paper describing how \sbcl{} is bootstrapped
\cite{Rhodes:2008:SSC:1482373.1482380}, Rhodes gives an overview of
how different existing \commonlisp{} systems are made to evolve.
Below, we summarize the contents of that paper.

We can roughly divide \commonlisp{} implementations into those that
are mostly written in some other language, and those that are mostly
written in \commonlisp{}.

In the first category, there are implementations that specifically
cater to applications written in that other language and that need
some scripting capabilities that are supplied by the \commonlisp{}
implementation.  Whether it is advantageous or not for these
implementations to be written mainly in that other language is outside
the scope of this paper.

Of the implementations in the second category that are currently
actively used, Rhodes claims%
\footnote{For the commercial \commonlisp{} implementations cited in
  the paper by Rhodes, he includes a disclaimer that only anecdotal
  evidence for this information is available.}
that \allegro{}, \lispworks{}, \cmucl{}, Scieneer, and \ccl{} are only
possible to build using older versions of the same system, and only
using image-based techniques.  Only \sbcl{} can be bootstrapped using
several other \commonlisp{} implementations.

Even a \commonlisp{} implementation that is largely written in
\commonlisp{} such as \sbcl{} has some amount of code written in other
languages.  In the case of \sbcl{}, Rhodes gives the number
$35\thinspace000$ lines of \clanguage{} and assembly code ``for
services such as signal handling and garbage collection'', of which
$8\thinspace000$ is for the garbage collector.  The remaining lines
can be summarized as around $2\thinspace000$ lines per operating
system supported.  This amount of code written in other languages is
very modest.

\subsection{\commonlisp{} systems in other languages}

When a language such as \clanguage{} or \cplusplus{} is used to
implement a \commonlisp{} system, typically a small subset of the
\commonlisp{} language is implemented this way.  We call that subset
the \emph{base} language.  The result of the initial bootstrapping
process is typically an executable file containing the base system.
Additional modules are then added to the base system to obtain a
complete \commonlisp{} system.  These additional modules must be
implemented in a subset of \commonlisp{} defined by the base system
and previously added modules.

There are several issues with this technique.  For one thing, some
major components that would be more easily expressed in \commonlisp{}
must be written using the base language, in particular a reader and an
evaluator, so that new modules can be added to the system.

Another major issue has to do with maintenance.  When one of the
additional modules is modified, it is easy to forget exactly what
subset of the \commonlisp{} language is allowed at that point in the
bootstrapping process.  The code for a particular module must often be
expressed in some unidiomatic way and it is tempting to make the
modified code more idiomatic, but doing so will then break the
bootstrapping procedure.

\subsection{Specific \commonlisp{} issues}

Because of the way compilation is defined by the \commonlisp{}
standard, there are some issues that need to be resolved in order for
it to be possible for a target \commonlisp{} system to be bootstrapped
on a host \commonlisp{} system.
