\section{Our technique}

We suggest a \clos{}-based \emph{protocol} defining the set of
operations on a first-class environment.  This protocol contains
around $40$ generic functions.

Mainly, the protocol contains versions of \commonlisp{} environment
functions such as \texttt{fboundp}, \texttt{find-class}, etc. that
take an additional required \texttt{environment} argument.

For a simple example, consider the \sicl{} implementation of the
standard \commonlisp{} function \texttt{fboundp}:

{\small\begin{verbatim}
(defun fboundp (name)
  (sicl-genv:fboundp
    name
    (load-time-value
      (symbol-value 'sicl-genv:+global-environment+))))
\end{verbatim}}

In this example \texttt{sicl-genv} is the nickname for the package
named \texttt{sicl-global-environment} which contains the symbols of
the protocol defined in this paper.  In each global environment, the
constant variable \texttt{+global-environment+} in that package holds
the value of the environment itself.  When the definition in the
example above is \emph{loaded}, either as source or from a previously
compiled file, the value of the \texttt{load-time-value} form will
therefore be the global environment in which the definition is loaded,
thereby permanently \emph{linking} this definition to that global
environment.

In addition to these functions, the protocol contains a set of
functions for accessing \emph{cells} that in most implementations
would be stored elsewhere.  Thus, a binding of a function name to a
function object contains an indirection in the form of a
\emph{function cell}.  The same holds for the binding of a variable
name (a symbol) to its \emph{global value}.  In our implementation,
these cells are ordinary \texttt{cons} cells with the \texttt{car}
containing the value of the binding, and the \texttt{cdr} containing
\texttt{nil}.

These cells are created as needed.  The first time a reference to a
function is made, the corresponding cell is created.  Compiled code
that refers to a global function will have the corresponding cell in
its run-time environment.  The cost of accessing a function at
run-time is therefore no greater in our implementation than in an
implementation that accesses the function through the symbol naming
it.

Our technique does, however, incur a performance penalty for functions
such as \texttt{fdefinition} and \texttt{symbol-value} with an
argument that is computed at run-time%
\footnote{When the argument is a constant, a suitable
  \emph{compiler-macro} can turn the form into an access of the
  corresponding cell.}
compared to an implementation in which each symbol contains slots for
these objects.  However, even in a high-performance implementation such
as \sbcl{}, these values are \emph{not} contained in symbol slots.
