\chapter{Memory allocator}
\label{app-memory-allocator}

\section{Memory is divided into chunks}
\label{sec-memory-allocator-memory-divided-into-chunks}

Available memory is divided into \emph{chunks}.  A chunk can either be
\emph{in use} or \emph{free}.  When a chunk is freed, and either the
previous chunk is free, the following chunk is free, or both the
previous and the following chunks are free, then the free chunks are
coalesced into a single free chunk.  As a consequence, there are never
two consecutive free chunks in memory.

Every chunk has an initial 64-bit word containing the \emph{size} of
the chunk in 8-bit bytes.  Since this value is always even, the last
bit is always $0$.  We use the last bit to indicate whether the
\emph{previous chunk} is in use or free.  If the bit is $1$, the
previous chunk is in use.  If the bit is $0$, the previous chunk is
free.  To obtain the size of the chunk in bytes, the last bit of the
word must first be masked out, using the \texttt{and} operation with
a mask containing a $1$ in every position except the least significant
one.

To determine whether a chunk is in use or free, the address of the
chunk is added to the size of the chunk, thereby obtaining the address
of the following chunk in memory.  Then the last bit of the word at
that address is tested.  If it is $1$, then the chunk is in use.  If
it is $0$, then the chunk is free.

A free chunk is linked into a doubly linked list of chunks in the same
bin.  See \refSec{sec-memory-allocator-bins-of-chunks} for more
details about the available bins.  The second 64-bit word of a free
chunk is a pointer to the previous chunk in the bin.  The third 64-bit
word of a free chunk is a pointer to the next chunk in the bin.  These
words do not point to the beginning of the previous or the next chunk.
Instead, the second word contains the address of the third word of the
previous chunk in the bin, and the third word contains the address of
the second word of the next chunk in the bin.  If there is no previous
chunk in the bin, then the second word contains the address of a
\emph{sentinel} that is the beginning of the bin.  Similarly, if there
is no next chunk in the bin, then the third word contains the address
of a sentinel that is the end of the bin.  By using these sentinels,
the algorithms for linking and unlinking a chunk are simplified.  The
last word of a free chunk contains the size of the chunk, just like
the first word.

Since a free chunk has at least four words in it, this is also the
minimum size allowed for any chunk.

\refFig{fig-chunks2} shows the constellation of two chunks where the
first chunk is in use and the second chunk is free.

\begin{figure}
\begin{center}
\inputfig{fig-chunks2.pdf_t}
\end{center}
\caption{\label{fig-chunks2}
Chunk in use followed by free chunk.}
\end{figure}

As \refFig{fig-chunks2} shows, the last bit of the first word of the
second chunk is $1$, indicating that the first chunk is in use.  The
first chunk contains the size word followed by user data.  The second
chunk contains the size in the first and the last word, and the second
and third words of the second chunk contain links to the previous and
the next chunk in the bin.

\refFig{fig-chunks3} shows the constellation of two chunks where the
first chunk is free and the second chunk is in use.

\begin{figure}
\begin{center}
\inputfig{fig-chunks3.pdf_t}
\end{center}
\caption{\label{fig-chunks3}
Free chunk followed by chunk in use.}
\end{figure}

As \refFig{fig-chunks3} shows, the last bit of the first word of the
second chunk is $0$, indicating that the first chunk is free.  The
first chunk contains the size in the first and the last word, and the
second and third words of the first chunk contain links to the
previous and the next chunk in the bin.  The second chunk contains the
size word followed by user data.

\refFig{fig-chunks4} shows the constellation of two chunks where both
chunks are in use.

\begin{figure}
\begin{center}
\inputfig{fig-chunks4.pdf_t}
\end{center}
\caption{\label{fig-chunks4}
Two chunks in use.}
\end{figure}

As \refFig{fig-chunks4} shows, the last bit of the first word of the
second chunk is $1$, indicating that the first chunk is in use.  Each
of the chunks contains the size in the first word and the remaining
words of the chunk contains user data.

\section{Bins of chunks of similar size}
\label{sec-memory-allocator-bins-of-chunks}

As indicated in
\refSec{sec-memory-allocator-memory-divided-into-chunks}, we maintain
a number of \emph{bins} containing chunks of similar size.  There are
$512$ bins in total, numbered from $0$ to $511$.  Each of the bins
from $0$ to $63$ contains chunks of of a single size.  Bin $0$
contains chunks with $4$ words (the minimum size) and bin $63$
contains chunks with $67$ words.  Bins starting at $64$ contain chunks
with a size greater than the maximum size of chunks in the previous
bin and less than or equal to some maximum size that is indicated
explicitly.  The maximum size of chunks in bins $64$ to $511$ grows by
roughly $8.8$\% compared to the previous one.  Thus the maximum size
of chunks in bin $64$ is $73$, that of chunks in bin $65$ is $79$,
etc.  The maximum chunk size of bin $511$ is $2^{61}$ words, or
$2^{64}$ bytes.  In bins $0$ to $63$, cunks are sorted by address.  In
bins $64$ to $511$ chunks are sorted first by size and then (if
several chunks have the same size) by address.

Three vectors of $512$ elements each are used to manage the bins.  One
vector contains the maximum size of chunks in the bin that corresponds
to the index.  The second vector contains the first sentinel of each
bin.  The third vector contains the last sentinel of each bin.  When
the bin is empty, the element in the second vector contains the
address of the element in the third vector and vice versa.  In
addition to these three vector, we also maintain a bitmap consisting
of $8$ $64$-bit words, containing a $1$ if the corresponding bin has
at least one chunk in it and $0$ if the corresponding bin contains no
chunks.  \refFig{fig-bins} illustrates the organization of the bins.

\begin{figure}
\begin{center}
\inputfig{fig-bins.pdf_t}
\end{center}
\caption{\label{fig-bins}
Organization of bins.}
\end{figure}

In the example in \refFig{fig-bins}, bin $0$ contains two chunks, bin
$63$ a single chunk, and bin $66$ contains three chunks.  Bins $64$,
$65$, and $511$ contain no chunks.

\section{Linking a chunk into a bin}

To link an arbitrary chunk of $n$ words into a bin, we first determine
which bin it should be linked into.  If $n \le 67$ then the chunk goes
into bin $n-4$.  If not, we do a binary search to find the bin with
the smallest maximum chunk size that is greater than or equal to $n$.
We then do a linear search of the chunks in the bin, ending either
when we find the last sentinel, or when we find the first chunk that
should be located after the one to be inserted.  Finally, the chunk to
be inserted is linked in using the normal insertion procedure for
doubly linked lists.

\section{Allocating a chunk}

To allocate a chunk with at least $n$ words in it, we first determine
the bin $b$ with the smallest possible maximum chunk size that is
greater than or equal to $n$.  If $n \le 67$ then the $b$ is computed
as $n-4$.  If not, we do a binary search to find $b$.

It is possible that $b$ is empty.  We must therefore find the smallest
bin $b'$ such that $b' \ge b$ and $b'$ is not empty.  We first compute
$q = b div 64$ and $r = b mod 64$ indicating that $b$ corresponds to
position $r$ in bitmap $q$.  We then compute a mask $m$ consisting of
$r$ leading $0$s and $64-r$ trailing $1$s.  This masked is and-ed with
the bitmap.  We then find the first $1$ in the resulting value.  If
such a position exists, then we have found $b'$.  If not, we search
bitmaps $q+1$, $q+2$ etc., without any mask, until a set bit is
found.  The first such bit found corresponds to $b'$.  If no such bit
is found, we request more memory from the operating system.

Once we find a chunk $c$ that is greater than or equal to $n$ words,
there are two cases:

\begin{enumerate}
\item If the size of $c$ is less than or equal to $n-4$, then we
  unlink the chunk from the bin and we are done.  The reason for the
  $4$ is that we can not use a residue less than $4$ words.
\item If the size $s$ of $c$ is strictly greater than $n$, then we
  unlink $c$ from its bin.  We then split $c$ into a chunk $c1$ of
  size $n$ and a chunk $c2$ of size $s-n$.  The chunk $c2$ is then
  linked into the bin that corresponds to its size.
\end{enumerate}
