\chapter{Processing return values}

In this chapter, we describe how processing return values is
accomplished by inserting HIR instructions immediately after HIR code
is generated from an abstract syntax tree.  As with the code for
processing arguments, by doing it this way, we obtain several
advantages:

\begin{itemize}
\item We simplify the translation of HIR code to LIR later on the
  translation process.
\item HIR transformations such as constant hoisting and
  \texttt{fdefinition} hoisting can be applied to the code for
  processing return values, thereby simplifying this code.
\item The HIR instructions introduced are subject to various HIR
  transformations such as value numbering, constant propagation,
  etc.
\end{itemize}

Clients that would like to use this technique for processing return
values would have a HIR transformation that replaces the
\texttt{multiple-to-fixed-instruction}.  Recall that the
\texttt{multiple-to-fixed-instruction} accesses the distinguished
location for multiple values and copies the values in that location to
individual lexical locations that make up the outputs of the
instruction.

The code that replaces the \texttt{multiple-to-fixed-instruction} is
shown in \refFig{fig-process-values}.

\begin{figure}
\begin{center}
\inputfig{fig-process-values.pdf_t}
\end{center}
\caption{\label{fig-process-values}
Processing return values.}
\end{figure}

In \refFig{fig-process-values}, N is the number of outputs of the
\texttt{multiple-to-fixed-instruction}.  The technique relies on the
assumption that there are usually at least as many return values as
the number of outputs of the \texttt{multiple-to-fixed-instruction}.
If that is the case, then the first comparison succeeds, and no other
comparison need to be executed.

The last comparison instruction takes the constant $1$ as its first
input.  We do not need to check for the number of return values being
greater than $0$, because we are always allowed to access return value
number $0$, even when there are no return values.  A function that
returns no values puts \texttt{nil} in the first values location so
that a caller that wants exactly one return value (the most common
case) does not need to check the number of return values.

Again referring to \refFig{fig-process-values}, RVC is a lexical
location holding the return-values count as a fixnum.  Instructions
labeled RV are instruction of type \texttt{return-value-instruction}
that each takes a constant fixnum input, accesses the value with that
index in the distinguished values location and assigns that value to
the lexical location of its output.  The locations labeled ``var 0''
to ``var N-1'' in \refFig{fig-process-values} are the outputs of the
\texttt{multiple-to-fixed-instruction} that is being replaced.
