\section{Benefits of our technique}
\label{sec-benefits}

Our technique differ both from the tradition of debugging in
\unix{}-type systems and from the tradition used in FLOSS
\commonlisp{} systems.

\subsection{Difference compared to \unix{}-like systems}

Whereas \unix{}-like systems typically run the debugger in a different
\emph{process} from that (or those) of the application, with our
technique we run both the debugger and the application in the same
process.

The main advantage to this organization is that communication between
the debugger and the application is greatly simplified.  There is no
no need for a wire protocol to encode and decode data in the form of
sequences of octets.  Instead, we can send data in the form of
arbitrarily complex data structures between the two.  

\subsection{Difference compared to most FLOSS \commonlisp{} systems}

Most FLOSS \commonlisp{} implementations have a history that started
before multi-threading was common.  As a result, features such as
breakpoints and tracing are often implemented as modifications to
modifications.

For example, in \sbcl{}, the application programmer can choose to
\emph{trace} a function in two different ways.  One way is by means of
\emph{encapsulation}, meaning that the function is not modified, and
instead wrapped in a small routine that then replaces the function as
associated with the function \emph{name}.  The function being traced
is not modified.  The other way is by means of an breakpoint, meaning
that the code of the function being traced is modified.

However, in both cases, every caller of the function being traced is
affected, barring a caller that is in possession of the function
object itself, rather than its name.  As a result, it is very likely
impractical to trace system functions that may be used internally by
the system.  For example, tracing \texttt{find} or \texttt{position}
(if at all possible) is likely to generate so much information from
callers that are irrelevant to the application programmer as to make
the information impossible to exploit.  And tracing functions such as
\texttt{print}, \texttt{format}, or \texttt{write} would be entirely
impossible, since the trace output would very likely call these
functions in order to generate the output information meant for the
application programmer.

With our suggested technique, tracing a function does not create an
encapsulation and does not modify the code of the function.  Instead,
the existing code communicates with the debugger, and the debugger,
running in a different thread, is in charge of displaying information
to the application programmer.  As a direct consequence, there are no
restrictions such as those indicated above.  The only possible
restriction has to do with inlining, though it may very well turn out
to be possible to propagate debugging information with inlining,
thereby making it possible to trace, or to set breakpoints in any
function such as \texttt{car} or \texttt{+}.  However, it may turn out
that the inclusion of debugging code in such low-level functions be
prohibitive in terms of performance of code run under the control of
the debugger.
