\section{HIR}
\label{sec-hir}

Type inference in Cleavir is done after the problem has been reduced
to a ``high-level intermediate representation'', or HIR. The HIR
consists of nodes called \textit{instructions} connected to each other
by arcs to form a graph of the program control flow. Each instruction
has zero or more inputs (constants or variables), zero or more
variables as outputs, and represents some small operation that reads
only from the inputs and writes only to the outputs.

This representation is called ``high-level'' because almost all values
for variables are \commonlisp{} objects, and low-level computations
such as address calculations are not involved. Further stages of
compilation, including optimizations from type inference, can refine
the intermediate representation to a lower-level form.

Most HIR instructions have undefined behavior on values not of certain
types. For example, the \texttt{cdr} instruction has one input, which
must be a cons. To represent the \commonlisp{} \texttt{cdr} function,
which can also be validly called on \texttt{nil}, type descrimination
is necessary.

HIR includes type declaration information with the \texttt{the}
instruction, which corresponds to the \commonlisp{} special operator
of the same name. A \texttt{the} instruction has one input and no
outputs, and an associated type. It has no operational effect, but
informs the type inferencer that the input is of that type at that
control point. After type inference, all \texttt{the} instructions can
be removed.

Explicit type checks are represented in HIR by the \texttt{typeq}
instruction. Each typeq instruction has a type associated with it when
the HIR graph is produced. When run, typeq branches to one instruction
if its one input is of the given type, and to the other if it is not.

For example, \texttt{cdr} might be represented as shown in
\refFig{fig-cdr}.  The first typeq's left branch continues to the
behavior for cons operands, and the second typeq's left branch
continues to the behavior on null operands. The remaining branch is
reached only if the operand is neither a cons nor null, and therefore
signals a type error.

\begin{figure}
\begin{center}
\inputfig{fig-cdr-hir.pdf_t}
\end{center}
\caption{\label{fig-cdr}
Implementation of \texttt{cdr} in HIR.}
\end{figure}
